# EastmanLamPark_ENV872_EDA_FinalProject

## Summary
We are using this repository to upload data from NOAA's Tides & Currents Datasets for sea level measurements and NOAA's National Data Buoy Center for water temperature measurements. We are looking at monthly data for water temperature and sea level at three different coastal sites: Beaufort Marine Lab, Hatteras Island, and Wrightsville Beach. Sea level and water temperature were the chosen parameters to assess because they are indicators of climate change, and we want to analyze the changes occuring on the coast of North Carolina due to climate change. The data begins on the first day of 2011 and ends on November 31, 2022. This project will use a time series analysis to identify seasonal trends and changes in sea level and water temperature over the past 12 years using a Mann Kendall test. We will then identify if there is a statistical relationship between the two parameters using a Kendall correlation test.

<describe the purpose of this repository, the information it contains, and any relevant analysis goals. What, why, where, when, how?>


## Investigators
Nicole Eastman, Ariel Lam, and Jiyoung Park are Masters students at the Nicholas School of the Environment at Duke University. 
Contact information:
  Nicole: nicole.eastman@duke.edu
  Ariel: ariel.lam@duke.edu
  Jiyoung: jiyoung.park@duke.edu

## Keywords
sea level rise
water temperature
climate change
coastal change
seasonality
statistical significance

## Database Information
Data from NOAA's Tides and Currents Database was accessed on November 20, 2022. The data acquired from the website includes monthly sea level data from Beaufort Marine Lab, Hatteras Island, and Wrightsville Beach from their earliest recorded data April 27, 2010 to November 30, 2022. The water temperature data was collected every 6 minutes by NOAA and we acquired this data from NOAA's National Data Buoy Center on December 1, 2022. The water temperature data dates back to January 1, 2011. We wrangled the data to average the sea level and water temperature measurements from NOAA for each month from 2011 to 2022 in order to create dataframes with identical periods of measurements for the analyses.

<describe the origin of all data in the repository, including data collected from outside sources and new data generated by the investigator(s). If data was accessed from an outside database, the date(s) of data access should also be included.>


## Folder structure, file formats, and naming conventions 
This repository contains a code folder containing the code developed in R studio to complete the analysis, an output folder with final plots and computed statistics from analyses, a Raw_Data folder with the raw datasets downloaded from NOAA, and a Processed_Data folder with the raw data wrangled for monthly average values (excluding N/As). All of the raw and processed data are in csv format, the code files are RMDs, and the outputs will be jpg. We use "_" to dictate a space in a folder name and include the type of data, either sea level or water temperature. We also include the station name or if the data contains measurements from all stations we label the file as combined. In the Project_Instructions folder, we compiled all written guidance and templates for our reference created by the instructors of our Environmental Data Analysis course at Duke University, Dr. John Fay and Dr. Luana Lima.

## Metadata
In the Raw_Data folder, Beaufort_Marine_Lab_2010_2022_SeaLevelRise.csv, the Hatteras_2010_2022_SeaLevelRise.csv, and WrightsvilleBeach_2010_2022_SeaLEvelRise.csv have the same columns. They begin with a column for the date the sea level measurement was collected which is classified as a Date and is in the format of Year-Month-Day. The second column marks the time of the collection as a numeric value with a unit of time in GMT, but they are all 0 because these are daily average measurements. The column noted as "Highest" reports the highest sea level recorded that day as a numeric in feet. MHHW is the mean higher high water measurement in feet, this numeric value represents the mean of the two highest sea level measurements. Similarly, MHW is recorded in feet as a numeric string and averages the mean high water values recorded at high tide. MSL is recorded as a numeric in feet and this value is the mean of recorded sea level measurements for that day. MTL is measured as feet and classified as numeric. This measurement is the mean tide level which is calculated as a datum based on the average of the MHW and MLW. MLW, also a numeric measured in feet, is the mean of all low water heights for that day. MLLW is a numeric in feet that calculates the mean of the two lowest low water heights for each day. The numeric "Lowest" column marks the lowest sea level measurements in feet measured for each day. 

<For each data file in the repository, describe the data contained in each column. Include the column name, a description of the information, the class of data, and any units associated with the data. Create a list or table for each data file.> 

## Scripts and code
In the code folder, we began the project by using the Wrangling_Data file to process the data to be in monthly format for sea level rise and water temperature data acquired from NOAA beginning in 2011. We then created the Data_Exploration rmd file to begin graphing the data and looking at trends over the years in sea level rise and water temperature fluctuations. We used the Data_Analysis rmd file to import our processed data frames and complete time series analysis, graphical representations, and a correlation test between the two variables. Finally, we used the Final_Project_Climate_Change_Analysis rmd file to organize the three different rmd files previously listed into one replicable code.

## Quality assurance/quality control

<describe any relevant QA/QC procedures taken with your data. Some ideas can be found here:>
<https://www.dataone.org/best-practices/develop-quality-assurance-and-quality-control-plan>
<https://www.dataone.org/best-practices/ensure-basic-quality-control>
<https://www.dataone.org/best-practices/communicate-data-quality>
<https://www.dataone.org/best-practices/identify-outliers>
<https://www.dataone.org/best-practices/identify-values-are-estimated>
